---
title: "From Virtual Hideaway to International Talk"
description: "How I ended up speaking abroad while having made it a point to avoid public speaking."
slug: virtual-hideaway-international-talk
date: 2024-02-08 00:00:00+0000
original: true
image: cover.jpg
categories:
    - Personal
tags:
    - Me
    - Presentations
---

On February 1, 2024, I had the honor of speaking at the [Cloud Technology Townhall Tallinn 2024 (CTTT2024)](https://cloudtechtallinn.com/2024-schedule/). This marked my first international presentation, and I'm eager to share the path that led me there. I write this reflection for myself—to catalog the journey and the lessons it bestowed upon me. Yet, I also hope it serves to inspire others to step forward and share their insights with the world.

In this article, I'll frequently mention [Matthijs van der Veer](https://www.linkedin.com/in/matthijsvanderveer). His guidance was instrumental throughout this journey, and I am deeply appreciative of his support. Should you encounter Matthijs at a conference, I wholeheartedly recommend attending his session. He's not only an exceptional speaker but also a wealth of knowledge.

## The road to Tallinn

In consulting, moments often arise when you find yourself between assignments. During these periods, my employer encourages us to use the time to enhance our professional authority. In mid-2023, as the influence and potential of Generative AI (GenAI) for our clients became increasingly evident, I was encouraged to delve into this topic, especially given its rising interest among our customers. One area that stood out was Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG), particularly relevant since GPT-3.5 was limited to only 4k tokens at the time, making RAG a promising technique for short-term applications. Eager to understand the technology firsthand, a colleague and I, both awaiting new projects, began our exploration. Our journey into research and experimentation helped us gain a deeper understanding. Upon sharing my insights with my manager, the inevitable question I had anticipated was posed: "When are you doing an XKE on this?" XKE, or [Xebia Knowledge Exchange](https://xke.xebia.com/faq/), is our biweekly internal "conference" where we explore topics of personal interest with our peers.

This was the moment when, despite my usual tendency to avoid such situations, I realized evasion might not be an option this time. Resigned to facing the challenge head-on, I decided to stop dodging and take the leap. Fortunately, the colleague with whom I had been exploring this topic had no reservations about presenting. In a way, I convinced myself that I could somewhat 'hide' behind his confidence. During our research, the subject captivated me deeply, and, being the technophile that I am, I plunged into the technicalities. This focus led to a less-than-ideal collaboration, as our attention diverged. The consequence was a presentation split into two distinct parts: one detailing the proof of concept (PoC) we developed during our investigation, and the other more focused on the technical learnings and specifics of the PoC, with me delving deeper into the latter. Given our audience comprised entirely of tech enthusiasts, I ended up leading and addressing questions for the majority of the session. This was a significant step outside my comfort zone, but I was ultimately pleased with the outcome and received positive feedback.

Fast forward a few weeks, and Microsoft unveiled the [Microsoft Learn AI Skills Challenge](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/events/learn-events/ai-cloudskills-challenge/), inviting partners to host meetups centered on Azure AI. Remembering my presentation, my colleagues volunteered me to lead a session on the topic. This being a public event, my nerves were more frayed than usual. However, my remarkable colleague Matthijs, seasoned in public speaking, offered his support. We opted for a two-part session: Matthijs would cover SaaS offerings, while I would tackle the DIY solutions. The tight schedule for the event, surprisingly, worked in my favor by limiting the time I spent dwelling on my anxiety. On the day of the event, though, I was a bundle of nerves, requiring a few moments to compose myself before starting. However, as I progressed past the initial slides, I shifted into a mode of explaining to peers, an approach I usually find enjoyable. This experience was a monumental step for me, demonstrating my ability to handle public speaking despite my reservations and self-doubt. Though I did not relish the process and berated myself for letting myself get volunteered, the positive feedback and engaging discussions with attendees afterwards made it all worthwhile.

Following the success of our session and driven by Matthijs's personal goal to increase his speaking engagements, he began submitting our presentation to various conferences through Requests for Papers (RFPs). He asked if I was interested in joining him. Despite the vivid memory of my previous anxiety, I adopted a "why not" attitude, somewhat burying my head in the sand, not fully processing the implications. Surprisingly, our proposal was accepted, and we were off to Tallinn. The realization hit me like a ton of bricks, triggering a familiar wave of panic that would visit me repeatedly in the weeks leading up to the conference. Unlike the Azure AI Summer Jam, this event was two months away, affording me plenty of time to oscillate between anxiety and dread.

In the run-up to the conference, we were asked to create a promotional video—a task I had never faced before and, akin to presenting, was not particularly excited about. However, I was fortunate to have Matthijs by my side, who not only had ample experience with such endeavors but also the patience to guide me through the process. The end result was a video that received a lot of positive feedback, although personally, I found the experience rather daunting. Despite my reservations, others seemed to appreciate it. If you're curious, you can watch the video [here](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/cloud-technology-townhall-tallinn-2024_tallinntv-cttt24-llm-activity-7138203546910470147-MAXo) and, of course, I welcome your feedback with a wink 😉.

The ironic part of that promotional video is that we claimed to have completed our presentation, which, in reality, was far from the truth. At that point, all we had was the original talk from the Azure AI Summer Jam. Both of us wanted to elevate the presentation, but faced with the looming stress of the upcoming event, I reverted to my "head in the sand" approach. We procrastinated, letting the deadline creep dangerously close. As December approached and I planned to take my usual break between Christmas and New Year's, I added a few extra weeks off, intending to dedicate the last week of my vacation to the presentation. However, an unexpected health issue—a kidney stone—left me couch-bound, clear-minded enough to work on the presentation but physically unable to do so.

Before the vacation, we had a brief session to discuss how we wanted to change the presentation, but we never fully synchronized our plans. So, when I sat down at my computer during the last week of my vacation, driven by a mix of anxiety and the effects of pain medication, I didn't tackle what truly needed attention. The overwhelming sense of losing control was palpable. We knew we wanted to alter the presentation, to take a different approach, yet we hadn't concretely discussed the specifics—what changes were necessary, or how the revised outline should look. In search of comfort, I defaulted to what I knew best: I began building a demo application. However, this led to an obvious issue: without a clear direction on what we were going to discuss, what purpose did the demo serve? My actions were based solely on my interpretation of our initial, vague discussion. Predictably, this approach resulted in a demo that didn't align with our intended message. It was only when we reconvened, with just a week to spare and my stress levels sky-high, that we managed to clarify our presentation's direction. This clarity allowed me to adjust the demo, salvaging some of the work I had done. As we refined our focus, I began to regain a sense of control, easing the stress. Yet, the challenges weren't over. With the presentation's structure finalized, I had to meticulously time each section and practice my delivery. This process uncovered a new personal discomfort: speaking to an empty room. Every missed cue or stutter led to a restart, increasing my frustration and anxiety. Despite these struggles, I persisted and saw gradual improvement. Compounding these challenges was the emergence of [imposter syndrome](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impostor_syndrome), leading me to question the value and novelty of our content. Fearing that it might bore the audience or waste their time, I faced a critical decision. With no opportunity for major revisions, I had to accept our presentation as it was and prepare to deliver it to the best of my ability.

While I was grappling with my illness, Xebia announced a new iteration of the Azure AI Summer Jam, aptly named the [Azure AI Winter Jam](https://events.xebia.com/azure-ai-winter-jam-2024). Scheduled in the same week as CTTT2024, it presented an ideal chance for a trial run of our presentation, advancing our deadline by two days. Despite the Winter Jam's setup echoing the summer edition, the knowledge that we would soon be presenting internationally added an unexpected weight to my shoulders. I spent that entire day rehearsing in my car, a makeshift solution to the challenge of finding a private space in the office where I could practice aloud without reservations. Each stumble over my lines amplified my stress, pushing me to the brink of withdrawing. Thankfully, a timely conversation with my wife over the phone calmed my nerves and refocused my resolve. The trial run proved beneficial, revealing several technical issues. My computer behaved unpredictably when toggling between PowerPoint and Visual Studio. Moreover, a presenter mode in Visual Studio, designed for session-specific customization without altering my standard settings, unexpectedly launched a seldom-used browser for internet access, initiating first-time setup procedures. Despite these technical snags, we successfully delivered our presentation, receiving constructive feedback that was invaluable for our preparation.

The next day, off to Estonia, me and Matthijs spend the remainder of the travel day walking around Tallinn, It's quite a beautiful city and after enjoying a little to much of the local cuisine and beer got ready for the next day. I had slept terrible, woke up at 03:30 and my brain turned on and I could not turn it back off again. Great start of the day, We attended a few sessions during the day, but I noticed that I was registering less and less of what was being discussed. I felt myself slipping in to panic more and more. There I noticed another strange behavior of my body, I began to uncontrollably shake, like I was standing outside in the cold without a coat. It was not cold in the room, no one else was shivering, it took me a while but Matthijs asking me if I was ok made me realize that I was just flat out terrified. I have never experienced such fear before. Looking back at it now, I see it as a valuable experience, but at that time it just contributed to the stress. But when it was finally time to present, I somehow managed to trigger a coping mechanism I use often, put the feeling in a "box" and put that on a shelf. It doesn't exist and is not there. When my part of the presentation started, I just started talking, Matthijs commented afterwards that I started out holding the lectern, and once I let that go he noticed me shifting into the explain to peers mode, and the rest of the presentation went quite smooth. Funny thing is that I remember that moment, thinking to myself why are you holding on to this thing and letting go. But I don't remember the feeling of fear leaving along with the letting go. So in my head I was still screaming in terror, but outwards people where not noticing this. In the end I was quite happy with the result, no technical issues, no tongue twisting, no freezing up. And when we where done people approached us with questions and comments, and I had a blast talking about the subject with the attendees after the session.

The next day, Matthijs and I headed to Estonia, spending our arrival day wandering around Tallinn. It's a stunning place, and we might've gone a bit overboard with the local food and drinks while getting ready for what was coming. That night, sleep just wouldn't stick – I was up at 3:30 AM, brain buzzing and refusing to shut off. Not exactly the kick-off I hoped for. As we attended some sessions the next day, I could feel myself zoning out more and more, my anxiety creeping up on me. Then, something weird happened – I started shaking like I was freezing, but the room was totally fine. It wasn't until Matthijs checked in on me, asking if I was okay, that it hit me: I was absolutely petrified, way more than I'd ever been. Looking back, I can see it was a big moment for me, even though it just piled on the stress at the time.

When it was our turn to present, I went back to an old trick of mine, trying to box up my fear and shove it aside. I guess it worked because as soon as I started talking, something clicked. Matthijs mentioned later that I loosened up after I stopped clinging to the lectern, and I shifted back into the mode I have noticed before, explaining to peers. It's funny; I remember thinking, "Why am I even holding onto this thing?" but not really feeling the scare fade away as I let go. Inside, I was still freaking out, but it seemed like no one else could tell. By the end, I was actually pretty stoked with how it all went down—no glitches, no getting tongue-tied, just smooth sailing. And the best part? After we wrapped up, folks came up to us with questions and to chat more about it all, making the whole thing way more fun than I expected.

That evening, at the speaker dinner, the conference organizer came over to tell us that quite a few people had praised our session. Some attendees even went the extra mile to fill out feedback forms, and the comments were really encouraging. Even though it's tough for me to fully bask in the outcome, I can't help but feel proud. I managed to pull off something that would've blown my 12-year-old mind, and I didn't drop the ball.

## Why do this?

As you might have read between the lines, this whole thing was quite the experience for me, and I can honestly say, it would not have happened 2 years ago.

When I started school, All I knew was that I wanted to do something with computers, as time passed I learned just how vast the field of Information Technology is and the more I explored, the more the Development side of things appealed to me. One where I could just lose myself in my computer. This appealed to me given my experiences of being bullied though out my childhood, a computer is a lot more predictable than a human. As I navigated my career challenging myself to learn new things, I discovered that to solve the challenging problems and to make the most impact, the emphasis of building solutions shifted from technical excellence to communication. Having seen the impact a good team or leadership can have on a solution. I started to see the importance of communication, sharing knowledge, Inspiring people, telling a story. It shaped my opinion about what makes a good leader and what hinders. I concluded that if I want to excel in my career and "epic shit" I would need to work on the skills I avoided exercising for my entire career, I would need to look up and interact with people.

I have always worked at so called product companies, strive to be a great developer and contribute to the smooth and efficient day to day of that company. But I realized that working with the same people for long stretches of time does not challenge me on the one area I need it. I need run-time with people that don't know me and don't innately trust me. So I started looking at consulting, to me this was a perfect breeding ground for skills I want to have. Switching in and out of teams regularly and dealing with office politics will force me to brush up on the communication and sharing knowledge skills.

Little did I know that the remaining two skills where also up for grabs. I have always looked at presenting as a way to train the last two skills, inspiring and telling a story, given my dyslexia, I have always been more attracted to video and audio content primary and written content secondary. I would use conference talks and podcasts as guides to the latest and greatest in the field. I would use them to filter the firehose of new stuff. And when finding an awesome speaker I would feel an itch to be able to do that. Telling a story to translate a complex concept into something that can help inspire people to look into something they might have overlooked.

While I have plenty to learn about consulting and even more to learn about standing on a stage and talking to a room full of people the way I want to be able to. With a little touch love from my colleagues that saw more in me than I did, I was able to do something my 12-year-old self would have never thought possible. I'm very grateful for their help. And maybe even a bit proud of myself, I'm not sure yet.

## Takeaways

- The importance of communication
The entire process could have been a lot smoother, and maybe a little less stressful if me and my colleague had just sat down earlier and discussed what we wanted to do, adding to that some type of sync meeting to keep track of progress. I'm quite happy with the result we achieved. But we could have lifted the presentation to a higher level if we had done so. The presentation we delivered was basically two parts glued together, where first I was waiting for him to do his part and then him waiting for me to do mine, a bit disjointed. Given some effort we could have made it more intertwined.
- Your slides matter
As I have always avoided public speaking, I never really put much effort into understanding and learning PowerPoint. Working together with a colleague that has a lot of experience with it, I learned that the slides are a big part of the story you are telling. They can help you to remember what you wanted to say, and they can help the audience to understand what you are saying. I saw my slides be transformed by him, and only in like a couple of minutes. But the impact was huge.
- Support
I could not have done this without the support of my colleague, he convinced me to do it, he basically did all the work, and allowed me to focus on what I felt I could contribute. If you, like me, have a desire to do something like this, I can't stress enough how important it is to find someone that can help and mentor you. I'm very grateful for his help.
- Practice
Once you have an idea of what you want to say, practice it. I found it very hard to talk to myself, and that didn't really get any better during the process. But I did notice that the more I practiced, the more comfortable I became with the content. And the more comfortable I became with the content, the more comfortable I became with the idea of presenting it. I also noticed that the more I practiced, the more I started to remember what I wanted to say, and the less I had to rely on the slides to remember what I wanted to say. This, at least subconsciously, enabled me to get on stage and just start talking, knowing that I would remember what I wanted to say.